Let me begin by telling you
what a topological ordering of
a directed graph is.
Essentially, it's an ordering of
the vertices of a graph so that all of
the arcs, the directed edges of the graph,
only go forward in the ordering.
So let me encode an ordering
by a labeling of
the vertices with
the numbers one through n.
This is just to encode the position
of each vertex in this ordering.
So formally there's going to be
a function which takes vertices of G and
maps them to integers between 1 and n.
Each of the numbers 1 through n should
be taken on by exactly one vertex.
Here n is the number of vertices of G.
So that's just a way to
encode an ordering, and
then here's really
the important property that
every directed edge of G goes
forward in the ordering.
That is if u v is directed
edge of the directed graph G,
then it should be that the f value of the
tail is less than the f value of the head.
That is this directed edge has
the higher f value as traverse
in the correct direction.
Let me give you an example
just to make this more clear.
So suppose we have this very simple
directed graph, with four vertices.
Let me show you two different,
totally legitimate topological
orderings of this graph.
So the first thing you could do,
is you could label s1, v2, w3 and t4.
Another option would be to
label them the same way,
except you can swap the labels of v and w.
So if you want, you can label v 3 and w 2.
So again,
what these labelings are really meant to
encode is an ordering of the vertices.
So the blue labeling,
you can think of as encoding
the ordering in which we put s
first then v then w and then t.
Whereas the green labeling can be
thought of as the same ordering of
the nodes except with w coming before v.
What's important is that the pattern
of the edge is exactly the same in both
cases, and in particular all of
the edges go forward in this ordering.
So in either case we have s with
edges from s to v, and s to w.
So that looks the same way pictorially,
whichever order v or w are in, and
then symmetrically there
are edges from v and w to t.
So you'll notice that no matter
which order that we put v and w in,
all four of these edges go forward
in each of these orderings.
Now if you try to put v before s
it wouldn't work because the edge
from s to v would be going
backward if v preceded s.
Similarly, if you put t anywhere
other than the final position,
you would not have a topological ordering.
So in fact,
these are the only two topological
orderings of this directed graph.
I encourage you to
convince yourself of that.
Now, who cares about
topological orderings?
Well, this is actually
a very useful subroutine.
This has been come up in
all kinds of applications.
Really, whenever you want to sequence
a bunch of tasks when there's precedent
constraints among them.
By precedence constraint I mean one
task has to be finished before another.
You can think, for example, about
the courses in some kind of undergraduate
major like a computer science major.
Here the vertices are going to
correspond to all of the course and
there's a directed edge from course A to
course B if course A is a prerequisite for
course B, if you have to take it first.
So then of course, you'd like to know
a sequence in which you can take these
courses so that you always take a course
after you've taken its pre-requisite.
And that's exactly what a topological
ordering will accomplish.
So it's reasonable to ask the question
when does a directed graph
have a topological ordering and
when a graph does have such an ordering,
how do we get our grubby
little hands on it?
Well there's a very clear
necessary condition for
a graph to have a topological ordering,
which is it had better be a cyclic.
Put differently,
if a directed graph has a directed cycle
then there is certainly no way there
is going to be a topological ordering.
So I hope the reason for
this is fairly clear.
Consider any directed graph which
does have a directed cycle and
consider any purported way
of ordering the vertices.
Well, now just traverse the edges
of the cycle, one by one.
So you start somewhere of the cycle, and
if the first edge goes backward, well,
you're already screwed.
You already know that this
ordering is not topological.
No edges can go backward.
So evidently, the first edge of
this cycle has to go forward.
But now, you have to traverse the rest
of the edges on this cycle, and
eventually you come back
to where you started.
So if you started out by going forward,
at some point you have to go backward.
So that edge goes
backward in the ordering,
violating the property of
the topological ordering.
That's true for every ordering, so
directed cycles exclude the possibility
of topological ordering.
Now the question is what
if you don't have a cycle?
Is that a strong enough condition
that you're guaranteed to
have a topological ordering?
Is the only obstruction to
sequencing jobs without conflicts
the obvious one of having
circular precedence constraints?
So it turns out not only is
the answer yes, as long as
you don't have any directed cycles,
you're guaranteed a topological ordering.
But we can even compute on in linear
time no less via depth-first search.
So before I show you the super slick and
super efficient reduction of computing
topological orderings
of depth-first search.
Let me first show over a pretty good but
slightly less slick and slightly less
efficient solution to help build up your
intuition about directed acyclic graphs
and their topological orderings.
So for the straightforward solution, we're
going to begin with a simple observation.
Every directed acyclic graph has what
I'm going to call a sink vertex.
That is a vertex without
any outgoing arcs.
So in the forenode, directed acyclic
graph we were exploring on the last slide
there's exactly one source of sink vertex,
and that's this right-most vertex here.
That has no outgoing arcs,
the other three vertices all
have at least one outgoing arc.
Now why is it the case that a directed
acyclic graph has to have a sink vertex?
Well, suppose it didn't,
suppose it had no sink vertex.
That would mean every single vertex
has at least one outgoing arc.
So what could we do if every
vertex has one outgoing arc?
Well, we can start in an arbitrary node.
We know it's not a sink vertex,
because we're assuming there aren't any.
So there's an outgoing arc,
so let's follow it.
We get to some other node.
By assumption there's no sink vertex,
so this isn't a sink vertex, so
there's an outgoing arc,
so let's follow it.
We get to some other node.
That also has an outgoing arc,
let's follow that, and so on.
So we just keep following outgoing arcs,
and we do this as long as we want
because every vertex has
at least one outgoing arc.
Well there's a finite number of vertices,
right this graph has say N vertices.
So if we follow N arcs,
we are going to see N+1 vertices.
So by the pigeon-hole principle,
we're going to have to see a repeat.
Right so, if N+1 vertices,
is only N distinct vertices,
we're going to see some vertex twice.
So for example, maybe after I take
the outgoing arc from this vertex,
I get back to this one
that I saw previously.
Well, what have we done?
What happens when we
get a repeated vertex?
By tracing these outgoing arcs and
repeating a vertex,
we have exhibited a directed cycle.
And that's exactly what we're
assuming doesn't exist.
We're talking about
directed acyclic graphs.
So, put differently,
we just prove that a vertex with no sink
vertex has to have a directed cycle.
So a directed acyclic graph therefore
has to have at least one sink vertex.
So here's how we use this one very simple
observation now to compute a topological
ordering of a directed acyclic graph.
Well let's do a little thought experiment.
Suppose in fact this graph
did have a topological order.
Let's think about the vertex which goes
last in this topological ordering.
Remember, any arc which goes backward
in the ordering is a violation.
So we have to avoid that.
We have to make sure every arc
goes forward in the ordering.
Now any vertex which has an outgoing arc,
we better put somewhere other than
in the final position, right?
So the node that we put in the final
position, all of its outgoing arcs
are going to wind up going backward
in the topological ordering.
There's no where else they can go,
this vertex is last.
So in other words,
if we plan to successfully compute
a topological ordering,
the only candidate vertices for
that final position in the ordering
are the sink vertices.
That's all that's going to work.
We put a non-sink vertex there,
we're toast, it's not going to happen.
Fortunately, if it's directed acyclic,
we know there is a sink vertex.
So let v be a sink vertex of g,
if there's many sink vertices,
we pick one arbitrarily.
We set v's label to be
the maximum possible, so
if there's n vertices we're going to
put that in the nth position.
And now we just recurse on the rest of
the graph, which has only n-1 vertices.
So how would this work in
the example on the right?
Well in the first iteration, or
the first outermost recursive call,
the only sink vertex is this
right most one, circled in green.
So there's four vertices, so
we're going to give that the label 4.
So, then having labeled that 4,
we delete that vertex and
all the edges incident to it.
And we recurse on what's
left of the graph, so
that would be the left-most three
vertices plus the left-most two edges.
Now, this graph has two sink vertices,
after we've deleted 4 and
everything from it.
So both this top vertex and this bottom
vertex are sinks in the residual graph.
So now in the next recursive call, we can
choose either of those as our sink vertex.
Because we have two choices,
that generates two topological orderings.
Those are exactly the ones
that we saw in the example.
But if, for example,
we choose this one to be our sink vertex,
then that gets the label 3.
Then we recurse just on
the northwestern most two edges.
This vertex is the unique sink in
that graph, that gets the label 2.
And then it recurs on the one node that
we graph, and that gets the label 1.
So, why is this algorithm work?
Well, there's just two
quick observations we need.
So, first of all, we need to argue that
it makes sense that in every iteration or
in every recursive call,
we can indeed find the sink vertex,
that we can assign in the final
position that's still unfilled.
And the reason for that is just if
you take a directed acyclic graph and
you delete one or more vertices from it,
you're still going to have
a directed acyclic graph, right?
You can't create cycles by
just getting rid of stuff.
You can only destroy cycles,
and we started with no cycles.
So through all the intermediate
recursive calls we have no cycles by
our first observation is always the sink.
So the second that that we have to
argue is that we really do produce
a topological ordering.
So remember what that means,
that means for every edge of the graph,
it goes forward in the ordering.
That is the head of the arc is given
a position later than the tail of the arc.
And this simply follows because
we always use sink vertices.
So consider the vertex v which
is assigned to the position i.
This means then, that when we're down to a
graph that only has i vertices remaining,
v is the sink vertex.
If v is the sink vertex when only
the first i vertices remain,
what property does it have
in the original graph?
Well, it means all of outgoing
arcs that it has have
to go to vertices that were already
deleted and assigned higher positions.
So for every vertex, by the time it
actually gets assigned a position,
it's a sink and it only has incoming
arcs from the as yet unsigned vertices.
It's outgoing arcs all go forward to
vertices that were already assigned higher
positions, and
got deleted previously from the graph.
So now we have under our belt
a pretty reasonable solution for
computing a topological ordering
of a directed acyclic graph.
In particular, remember we observed that
if a graph does have a directed cycle,
then of course there's no way
there's a topological ordering.
However, you order the vertices summage
of the side that's going to have to go
backward.
And the solution on the previous slide
shows that, as long as you don't have
a cycle, it guarantees the topological
ordering does indeed exist.
And in fact, it's a constructive proof,
constructive argument,
that gives an algorithm.
What you do is you would keep plucking off
sinks, sink vertices one at a time, and
populating the ordering from right to
left, as you keep peeling off these sinks.
So that's a pretty good algorithm,
it's not too slow,
and actually if you implement it just so,
you can even get it to run in linear time.
But I want to conclude this video with
an application of depth first search,
which is a very slick,
very efficient computation
of a topological ordering of
a directed acyclic graph.
So, we're just going to make two really
quite minor modifications to our previous
depth first search subroutine.
The first thing is we have
to embed it in a for loop,
just like we did with breadth first search
when we were computing the connected
components of an undirected graph.
That's because, in completing a
topological ordering, we better give every
single vertex a label, we'd better
look at every vertex at least once.
So to do that, we'll just make sure
there's an outer for loop and then if we
have multiple components, we'll just make
sure to invoke DFS as often as we need to.
The second thing we'll do is we'll
add a little bit of bookkeeping, and
this will make sure that
every node gets a label.
And in fact, these labels will
define a topological order.
So let's not forget the code for
depth first search.
This is where you're given a graph, G, in
this case we're interested in a directed
acyclic graph, and
you're given a start vertex, S.
And what you do is, as soon as you get to
S you very aggressively start trying to
explore its neighbors.
Of course, you don't visit any
vertex you've already been to.
You keep track of who you visited.
And if you find any vertex
that you haven't seen before,
you immediately start
recursing on that node.
So I said the first modification we
need is to embed this into an outer for
loop to ensure that every
single node gets labeled.
So I'm going to call
that subroutine DFS-Loop.
It does not take a start vertex.
Initialization, all nodes start
out on an explorative course.
And we're also going to keep
track of a global variable,
which I'll call current_label.
This is going to be initialized to n,
and we're going to count down each
time we finish exploring a new node.
And these will be precisely the f values.
These will be exactly
the positions of the vertices
in the topological
ordering that we output.
In the main loop we're going to iterate
over all of the nodes of the graph.
So for example,
we just do a scan through the node array.
As usual, we don't want to do any work
twice, so if a vertex has already
been explored in some previous invocation
of DFS, we don't search from it.
This should all be familiar from our
embedding of breadth first search in a for
loop when we computed the connected
components of an undirected graph.
And if we get to a vertex v of the graph,
that we haven't explored yet,
then we just invoke DFS in the graph,
with that vertex as the starting point.
So, the final thing I need to add is I
need to tell you what the f values are,
what the actual assignments
of vertices to positions are.
And as I foreshadowed, we're going to
use this global current_label variable.
And that'll have us assign vertices
to positions from right to the left.
Very much mimicking what was going
on in our recursive solution,
where we plucked off sink
vertices one at a time.
So, when's the right time to
assign a vertex its position?
Well, it turns out,
the right time is when we've
completely finished with that vertex.
So we're about to pop
the recursive call from the stack
corresponding to that vertex.
So, after we've gone through the for
loop of all the edges outgoing
from a given vertex, we set
f (s) = to whatever the current_label is
and then we decrement the current_label.
And that's it,
that is the entire algorithm.
So, the claim is going to be
that the f values produced,
which you'll notice are going to be
the integers between n through 1,
because DFS will be called
eventually once on every vertex, and
it will get some integer
assignment at the end.
And everybody is going to get a distinct
value, and the largest one is n and
the smallest one is 1.
The claim is that is
a topological ordering.
Clearly this algorithm is just
as blazingly fast as DFS itself,
with just a trivial amount
of extra bookkeeping.
Lets see how it works
on our running example.
So lets just say we have this four
node directed graph that we're getting
quite used to.
So this has four vertices, so
we initialize the current label
variable to be equal to 4.
So let's say that in the outer DFS loop,
let's say we start somewhere
like the vertex v.
So notice in this outer for
loop, we wind up considering the vertices
in a totally arbitrary order.
So let's say we first call
DFS from this vertex v.
So what happens, well, the only place you
can go from v is to t, and then at t,
there's nowhere to go.
So we recursively call DFS at t, there's
no edges to go through, we finish the for
loop, and so t is going to be assigned
an f value equal to the current label,
which is n, and here,
n is the number of vertices, which is 4.
So f(t) is going to get, so our t is
going to get the assignment, the label 4.
So then now we're done with t,
we backtrack back to v.
We decrement the current label as we
finish up with t, we get to v, and
now there's no more outgoing arcs
to explore, so for loops finish.
So we're done with it
in depth-first search.
So it gets what's the new current label,
which is now 3, and again,
having finished with v, we decrement
the current label, which is now down to 2.
So now we go back to the outer for loop,
maybe the next vertex we
consider is the vertex t.
But we've already been there,
so we don't bother to DFS on t.
And then maybe after that, we try it on s.
So maybe s is the third vertex
that the for loop considers.
We haven't seen s yet, so we invoke DFS,
starting from the vertex s.
From s, there's two arcs to explore,
the one with v, v we've already seen, so
nothing's going to happen with the arc sv.
But on the other hand, the arc sW will
cause us to recursively call DFS on w.
From w, we try to look at the arc from
w to t, but we've already been to t, so
we don't do anything.
That finishes up with w, so depth-first
search then finishes up at the vertex w,
w gets the assignment
of the current label.
So f(w) = 2.
We decrement current label,
now its value is 1.
Now we backtrack to s, so we've already
considered all of s's outgoing arcs, so
we're done with s.
It gets the current label, which is 1.
And this is indeed one of the two
topological orderings of this graph
that we exhibited a couple slides ago.
So that's the full description
of the algorithm and
how it works in a concrete example.
Let's just discuss what are its key
properties, its running time and
its correctness.
So, as far as the running time of this
algorithm the running time is linear.
It's exactly what you'd want it to be.
And the reason the running
time is linear is for
the usual reasons that these search
algorithms run in linear time.
You're explicitly keeping track
of which nodes you've been to so
that you don't visit them twice, so
you only do a constant amount of work for
each of the n nodes.
And each edge, in a directed graph,
you actually only look at each edge once,
when you visit the tail of that edge.
So you only do a constant amount
of work per edge as well.
Of course,
the other key property is correctness.
That is, we need to show that you are
guaranteed to get a topological ordering.
So what does that mean?
That means every arc travels
forward in the ordering.
So if (u,v) is an edge,
then f(u), the label assigned
to u in this algorithm is less
than the label assigned to v.
The proof of correctness
splits into two cases,
depending on which of the vertices u or
v is visited first by depth-first search.
Because of our for loop, which iterates
over all of the vertices of the graph g,
depth-first search is going to be invoked
exactly once from each of the vertices.
Either u or v could be first,
both are possible.
So first let's assume that u was visited
by DFS before v, so then what happens?
Well, remember what depth first search
does, when you invoke it from a node,
it's going to find everything
findable from that node.
So if u is visited before v,
that means v isn't getting explored, so
it's a candidate for being discovered.
Moreover, there's a an arc
straight from u to v, so
certainly DFS invoked at
u is going to discover v.
Furthermore, the recursive call
corresponding to the node v is going to
finish, it's going to get popped off
the program stack before that of u.
The easiest way to see this is just to
think about the recursive structure of
depth-first search.
So when you call depth-first search from
u, that recursive call, that's going to
make further recursive calls to all of
the relevant neighbors including v, and
u's call is not going to get popped off
the stack until v's does beforehand.
That's because of the last in,
first out nature of a stack or
of a recursive algorithm.
So because v's recursive call
finishes before that of u,
that means it will be assigned
a larger label than u.
Remember, the labels keep
decreasing as more and
more recursive calls get
popped off the stack.
So that's exactly what we wanted.
Now, what's up in the second case,
case two?
So this is where v is visited before u.
And here's where we use the fact
that the graph has no cycles.
So there's a direct arc from u to v.
That means there cannot be any directed
path from v all the way back to u.
That would create a directed cycle.
Therefore, DFS invoked from v
is not going to discover u.
There's no directed path from v to u,
again, if there was,
there'd be a directed cycle.
So it doesn't find u at all.
So the recursive call of v again
is going to get popped before
u's is even pushed onto the stack.
So we're totally done with v before
we even start to consider u.
So therefore, for the same reasons,
since v's recursive call finishes first,
its label is going to be larger,
which is exactly what we wanted to prove.
So that concludes the first
quite interesting application of
depth-first search.
In the next video, we'll look at an even
more interesting one which computes
the strongly connected
components of a directed graph.
This time, we can't do it in one
depth-first search, we'll need two.